---
description: |
  Contents
author: []
datePublished: '2016-12-15T22:44:00.506Z'
dateModified: '2016-12-15T22:42:21.124Z'
datePublishedOriginal: '2016-12-15T22:44:00.506Z'
title: ''
publisher: {}
via: {}
inFeed: true
starred: false
hasPage: true
sourcePath: _posts/2016-12-15-contents.md
url: contents/index.html
_context: 'http://schema.org'
_type: Article

---
Contents

page 62 General Editor's introduction
Richard Weinstein SC 8TH FLOOR SELBORNE
CHAMBERS and UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH
WALES

page 63 A practical guide to mediating "high conflict"
disputes --- Part II
Maria Gerace MAURICE BYERS CHAMBERS

page 66 Resolving Nazi-era looted art disputes by ADR
processes
Arthur Tompkins NEW ZEALAND DISTRICT COURT
and SUPREME COURT OF PITCAIRN ISLAND and
Louisa Gommans RAINEY COLLINS LAWYERS

page 73 Sexes of the battle: Sri Lanka's rehabilitation
programme
Part 1 --- restorative justice as an alternative
post-war dispute resolution mechanism
Melissa Martin UNITED NATIONS, DEPARTMENT
OF ECONOMIC AND SOCIAL AFFAIRS

page 80 The ethics of negotiation --- are we misleading
ourselves?
Scott J Maybury JACK SHAND CHAMBERS

General Editor
Richard Weinstein SC Barrister
8th Floor Selborne Chambers and
University of New South Wales

Editorial Panel
Peter Ambrose QC 18 Inns of Court,
Brisbane
John K Arthur Barrister,
List S, Owen Dixon Chambers,
Melbourne
Kirsten Gordge Partner, Finlaysons,
Adelaide
Michael Hollingdale Partner, HWL
Ebsworth Lawyers
Kerry Hogan-Ross Solicitor and
mediator, KHR Legal & Kerry
Hogan-Ross Mediations
Miiko Kumar Barrister and Senior
Lecturer, Jack Shand Chambers,
Faculty of Law, University of Sydney
Michael Legg Associate Professor,
Faculty of Law, University of New
South Wales
Deborah Lockhart Chief Executive
Offıcer, Australian Disputes Centre
Andrea Martignoni Partner, Allens
Kelly McIntyre Barrister, Alfred
Lutwyche Chambers, Brisbane
Mary Walker Barrister, 9 Wentworth
Chambers

2016 . Vol 3 No 4

Information contained in this newsletter is current as at August 2016

General Editor's introduction

Richard Weinstein SC 8TH FLOOR SELBORNE CHAMBERS and UNIVERSITY OF NEW SOUTH
WALES

I am delighted to introduce the fourth issue of the
third volume of the Australian Alternative Dispute
Resolution Law Bulletin. This issue continues with the
theme of alternative dispute resolution and restorative
justice, two articles of which touch upon its application
in an international context.

First is part two of an article from guest contributor
Maria Gerace, barrister and mediator in Sydney, in
which she continues her discussion of the challenges
faced when mediating "high conflict" disputes. Readers
will recall that Ms Gerace defines "high conflict" as
either the subject matter of the dispute or the strong
emotion and/or behaviour of parties or their advisors
which generates the heightened nature of the conflict. In
this second part, the author examines particular strate-
gies that may be employed to achieve successful out-
comes in such disputes, the frequency of which the
alternative dispute resolution community expects to
markedly increase over the next few years.

The second article is by guest contributors Judge
Arthur Tompkins of the New Zealand District Court and
Louise Gommans, arts lawyer of Wellington, New
Zealand. This fascinating piece discusses the role of
alternative dispute resolution in the context of finding
just and fair solutions (applying the Washington Prin-
ciples) in light of the continuing transnational disputes
over Nazi-era looted art. The two primary obstacles to
such claims --- limitation periods, and the bona fide
purchaser rule --- are dealt with in some detail. Readers
are likely to be familiar with perhaps the most famous
example of such a dispute, which concerned the repa-
triation of Gustav Klimt's Portrait of Adele Bloch-
Bauer, recently made into the film Woman in Gold.

Third is the first part of a three-part article by guest
contributor Melissa Martin of the University of Sydney.
Her scholarly contribution also reflects on an interna-

tional theme --- restorative justice as an alternative
post-war dispute resolution mechanism in the context of
the re-integration of the Liberation Tigers of Tamil
Eelam (LTTE, known colloquially as the Tamil Tigers),
following their defeat in the Sri Lankan civil war in
2009\. Ms Martin's original research focuses on the Sri
Lankan government's post-war restorative justice model
and deradicalisation strategy, and its implementation of
a 2-year rehabilitation program for ex-LTTE combat-
ants.

Last is an article from guest contributor Scott Maybury,
barrister of Sydney. Readers may recall Mr Maybury's
article in issue four of volume two of the bulletin on the
rise of the "new advocacy" in alternative dispute reso-
lution. In this article, the author explores ethical issues
that arise in the context of negotiation (and in particular
during alternative dispute resolution processes). It is the
author's view that barristers' and solicitors' rules aside,
more clear, specific and stringent rules are required so
that lawyers always engage in ethical negotiation prac-
tice.

I express my personal gratitude to this issue's con-
tributors, each of whom have accepted our invitation to
express views on matters that fall beyond the traditional
and well-known applications of alternative dispute reso-
lution in commercial contexts. I hope that the issue will
be of considerable interest and value to practitioners.

Richard Weinstein SC
General Editor
Barrister
8th Floor Selborne Chambers and
Adjunct Associate Professor
Faculty of Law, University of New South
Wales

australian alternative dispute resolution bulletin August 201662

A practical guide to mediating "high conflict"
disputes --- Part II
Maria Gerace MAURICE BYERS CHAMBERS

This paper is presented in two parts. The last issue of
the bulletin contained Part I which set out the nature of
a "high conflict" dispute and two of the suggested
strategies that might be utilised by practitioners. Part II
considers strategies for the mediation of high conflict
disputes.

Manage client's expectations
At times of high emotions, individuals can have

difficulty processing information given by their lawyers
and may have little understanding about the mediation
even after the process has been explained to them.

In order to allow clients to constructively respond in
a high conflict dispute:

• In advance of the mediation, explain the process
and provide advice about the dispute, prospects
and settlement options in writing. This will allow
the client plenty of time to consider the informa-
tion, ask questions and to process their emotional
response. It is less than ideal for clients to arrive at
the mediation, harried and stressed, in an unfamil-
iar environment, and be receiving advice on pros-
pects and settlement recommendations at the same
time.

• Explain to clients that the claim might not settle at
mediation and why the process might be useful
even if it does not result in settlement --- that it
might allow for consolidation of thinking and
determination about the appropriateness or other-
wise of going to court, or an opportunity to
understand the dispute and the opposing views and
attitudes more fully.

• Manage expectations about the negotiations, have
a plan and an agreement with the client. Early
advice (orally and in writing) setting out the
strategy for settlement can assist clients to prepare
and provide them with clarity and some certainty
about what is likely to happen at the mediation.
Ask the client to identify any "commercial" and
"personal" agendas that might influence their approach
to settlement.

Effective opening statements
Opening statements are powerful opportunities to set

the tone for the mediation. A good opening can help
settle feelings of mistrust, create an atmosphere of
respect that supports the mediation process, and builds
connection and engagement that will aid negotiation.
A good opening is:

• respectful;
• direct, honest but not personally blaming or aggres-

sive;
• considerate in language and tone to concerns that

parties to the dispute might have; and
• potentially informative of approach that might be

taken in the process or the factors that are influ-
encing the approach being taken.

When preparing an opening, the following questions
might help in determining what to say, or not to say:

• How can I deliver this message sincerely, directly
and respectfully?

• Do I need to say this?
• How is this likely to be received? Can I frame the

message in a way that removes any likely aggra-
vation of the dispute?

• Does the opening acknowledge the opponent's
position or concerns? Should you?

• What are your client's concerns? Can they be
communicated in the opening?

• Can I set people at ease by disclosing the approach
I am going to take at mediation? Or the views and
factors that are likely to shape the approach to
negotiations?

Less effective openings might focus on criticising an
opponent's case extensively or contain threats of what
will happen if the matter does not settle. In a recent ADR
process, representatives for adult survivors of child
sexual abuse opened by saying that if the matter did not
settle and ran to court, the papers would report exten-
sively on the allegations and that would cause great
suffering for the innocent family members of the perpe-
trator. Perhaps this would occur but it did nothing to
facilitate the negotiation in an already high conflict
atmosphere.

australian alternative dispute resolution bulletin August 2016 63

Very few people respond positively to a lecture and
rarely change their views on the merits just because
someone tells them they are wrong. People with their
back against a wall or who are threatened do not always
capitulate. When a party has nothing to lose, many
individuals will ark up, dig in their heels and fight on.

If the ultimate aim of mediation is to seek to resolve
a dispute on terms acceptable to all parties, a critical first
step is getting other parties to engage in the process. It is
extremely difficult to influence or negotiate with a party
you have just offended, enraged or put off.

Sometimes, however, you need to match the energy
of an opponent's opening or their statements. If an
opponent opens on the offensive, I think it is important
to match the energy at least briefly, address the issue
directly and then seek to identify concerns or other
means to build engagement:

• "Thanks for pointing out what you see as the
problems in our case, John. We do not agree but it
always helps to know how you might defend this
action" (trust me, this often stops lawyers from
giving you the lecture).

• Or "If this matter goes to court, we will each get
to put our views to the judge".

• Or "Everyone sees this problem differently. We do
not agree with what you have just said because x,
y, z but we seem to agree on the following matters
xxx".

I am not in favour of overly emotive openings and I
think they are counterproductive when mediating a high
conflict dispute. Just like stirring silt at the bottom of a
bucket of water clouds the water, stirring up emotion can
directly cloud the client's judgment and ability to make
decisions in the mediation. I confess that earlier in my
career, I believed that the expression of emotion, hurt
and distress would aid the mediation process. I no longer
hold that view as a general proposition. I think a
judicious statement about the emotion, loss or suffering
can be important in some instances but before opening
on those matters or inviting the client to do so, I suggest
thinking about what is likely to follow.

Recognise and learn how to handle the
"high conflict personalities" in mediations

High conflict behaviours can make mediation of any
dispute difficult. Those behaviours include all-or-
nothing thinking (it is my way or no way, my view is
what counts), blaming (it is all your fault), personalisa-
tion (their conduct is about me), predicting extreme
outcomes (I am ruined if they do not do this, it is
hopeless and unless I get $X I will be on the streets) and
unmanaged emotions (they may become very emotional

about their points of view and exhibit intense fear, anger,
yelling or disrespect for those nearby or receiving their
comments). They may want you as their lawyer to agree
with or defend their strong emotions and they have a
tendency to engage lawyers to act as their negative
advocates --- that is as instrument of wreaking revenge
and blame against the target. They may lash out verbally
and be very critical.

I suggest the following strategies for dealing with the
high conflict personality in mediation:

• Manage expectations by ensuring the client is
advised, preferably in writing, about the mediation
process, and the usual advice on prospects, pro-
cess and recommended settlement options well in
advance of the mediation. High conflict personali-
ties have difficulty managing their emotions and
react badly to feeling out of control.

• If you recognise your client is likely to exhibit
high conflict behaviours, discuss this with the
mediator in advance, so that the mediator can
adapt the process.

• Use neutral language about events, the process and
others involved in the dispute. Refrain from telling
your client the other side is difficult and never
makes offers and so on. Be cautious about provid-
ing extraneous information to the high conflict
personality. Stick to the script, what the mediation
is, what it offers, the claims, the prospects, a range
and the need for the client's instruction on settle-
ment.

• During the meditation, express facts and relevant
issues in direct but neutral terms: "We see the
issue as 'X', we expect you may not agree. We
think the following fact support our view --- x, y,
z." Lawyers might consider avoiding hyperbole
and overly emotive language: "Your actions ruined
our client's (health/life/marriage)", "Our client
will never recover, his health is gone, he never
sees his kids, he has nothing left ..." The critical
issue is this: will expressing the matters in this
way enhance the high conflict personality's ability
to participate in the process or inflame a person
already prone to uncontrollable emotion, blaming,
and black and white thinking?

• During the mediation, provide direct, respectful
and neutral openings and statements. What do you
need to say? What can you omit? Will a statement
about X inflame a person? If so, is it necessary?
Can the message be modified to remove any
inflammatory language or message?

• Learn specific techniques for dealing with the